This video is brought to you by Squarespace,
whether it's your new profession or just a lifelong passion,
start your journey to website glory with Squarespace,
check out their amazing all in one platform through the link in the description
below more on them in a bit
For centuries, the British army was not held in very high esteem by the public.
It was notorious for employing the dreads of society. Poor, desperate men,
prone to drunkenness and criminal behavior.
Its officers were almost the exact opposite foist gentlemen who literally bought
their way up the ranks.
It was this army that Britain needed to use to contain the sea seemingly endless
ambitions of the emperor of France, Napoleon bone art,
who crushed countless army sent against him and his marshals.
And he seemed destined to become the master of Europe.
It was at this moment of crisis.
The demand almost singlehandedly changed the course of world history through a
skill on the battlefield.
He took the British army full of fools and rogues as it was,
and honed it into a deadly weapon that defeated every Marshall Napoleon sent
against him.
He helped drive Napoleon office throne was rewarded handsomely by his king with
money and titles. And then incredibly was asked to take down Napoleon again.
When the man escaped from exile and reclaimed his crown,
when the two men finally faced each other on the battlefield,
it set up one of the greatest war stories the world had ever seen.
Initially, Arthur Wellesley did not seem to be a very remarkable man.
He was born on the 1st of May, 1769 in Dublin islands.
He was the second son of an Anglo Irish, no woman, Garrett Wesley,
the Earl of Mornington. He grew up in Irelands though.
The family like most members of the Irish Protestant ability model themselves
after the English Aris Toras they were descended from when Garrett died in 1781.
Arthur's older brother,
Richard inherited his title as well of Mornington along with all the landed
estates, as was often the case with younger sons of nobleman,
it left the question of what to do with Arthur.
He was enrolled at the prestigious eating college in England,
soon after his father's death, he hated it there.
It was very low only for him being so far from his family and the other boys
made fun of him because of his Irish heritage.
He left the school in 1784 and moved to Brussels with his mother who became
worried about him telling friends. I dunno, what I shall do with my awkward son.
Arthur Wellesley's opportunity for advancement came through the British army.
Serving in the military was considered an honorable profession for lesser sons
of the assuming of course, that you had the money for it.
Unlike in the Navy where offices were appointed and promoted based on merit and
seniority in the army, it was standard practice to purchase your commission,
usually for an exorbitant sum of money.
That is the equivalent of tens of thousands of English pounds in today's money.
The purchase system was put in place in the aftermath of the English civil war
and an effort to ensure that commoners like Oliver Cromwell would never be in a
position to leave army against the crown. Again, as a result,
the officer ranks of the British army were almost exclusively filled with
gentlemen, regardless of their actual martial ability.
Wellesley was able to take full advantage of the system along with his
connection to his brother,
the Earl of Mornington to buy his way up the ranks until in 1793,
he was a left tenant kernel attached to the 33rd regimen of foot raised in
Yorkshire. This was as high as he could rise through the purchase system.
Further promotion would have to be secured through merit or seniority as even
the British and ability recognized that allowing untrained officers to literally
buy a command of an army was a bad idea.
Wellesley first got the taste battle in 1794 when the 33rd foot was sent to the
Netherlands to join the army commanded by the duke of York,
attempting to contain the power of France who was attempting to spread the
ideals of the French revolution to all of Europe by force at the battle of Bal
Wellesley and the 33rd acquitted itself, well repelling a French cavalry charge,
but the campaign was a failure for the British plagued by disease and
incompetent leadership. And Wellesley returned to England in 1795
In 1796,
Wellesley newly promoted to Colonel was sent along with the 33rd regimen to
India. One of the most important stronghold of British trade in the world,
India was a complicated place at the time.
British interests were represented by the British east India company,
which started as an ordinary trading corporation,
but by the 1790s had become essentially a law onto itself in India.
The company controlled vast swaths of Indian territory made alliances with
neighboring principalities and raised large armies composed of a mix of Indian
soldiers called sea boys and troops from crate Britain complicating.
This was the machinations of the French who recognizing the importance of India
to British commerce, constantly worked to undermine them in 1798,
a celebrated French general named Napoleon Bonna apart had landed with an army
in Egypt and took control of the Ottoman province,
which would give them our access to the red sea and an ability to directly
threaten British trade in India. Not satisfied with that.
The French made and lions with the powerful Indian kingdom of Mya MEA and it
ruler.
The taboo Salton has long been an enemy over the British Byar at for three wars
already with, and the idea of French army in Egypt,
allying with the Maorian army, scared the British,
who to conquer the saltiness to prevent that from happening Maso are well
trained army,
like many Indian princes had European officers in its ILO to train them in the
modern style of warfare, especially French officers.
In the case of the Tippo Salton, they also had a large store of Maorian rockets,
advanced projectile that could be launched up to two kilometers,
far more advanced anything the British had at the time.
The TBU Salton would be a formidable fo in April, 1799,
the British and their Indian allies invaded by Saul from all sides converging on
the capital centering Al,
which they put under siege in commands of the 33rd regimen and seconded as a
division commander was Colonel Arthur,
Wellesley Wellesley wasn't well liked by the other senior officer who considered
him young and an experienced a product of nepotism since his brother was the
governor general of India.
This was further reinforced when Wellesley suffered to defeat at the hands of
the TBU Salton forces.
During the siege of se AAM sent to attack a small village outside the main
fortres to clear a way for the C artillery Wellesley's men got lost and stumbled
into a Myan trap coming under fire from a storm of musketry and the ever present
rocket explosives,
the men were driven back in confusion with several killed or captured Wellsley
himself was wounded in the knee.
And narrat avoided capture for another officer in his position,
the humiliation by meant the end of his mil career.
But thanks to the patronage of his brother,
he was able to recover and took part in the final storming of the city in may,
which resulted in the capture of the city and the death of the TPU Salton
marking the end of the war Wells. He was named governor Ofer,
AAM and stayed while most of the army withdrew,
but he never forgot the defeat before SAR AAM for the rest of his military
career. He showed an immense, a like for night attacks and seizures in general,
and tried to avoid both wherever possible
At the ends of 1802,
Wellesley was promoted to major general and sent off to war again to the north
of ER,
AAM was the powerful miraa Confederacy controlled by five chief chains that were
constantly squabbling with each other.
The British intervened in one of these power struggles,
taking the side of PUA Barger RA II against the Dallet skin, India,
the RA Barara and triggering the second Anglo miraa war general
Wellsley was put at the head of a mixed army of native Indian sea boys and
British regulars and sent north to destroy Cindy Andar combined armies like the
Tibu Salton skin army was large, but most were poorly trained.
Although it did have some 10,000 troops that were trained and commanded by
European offices.
The army itself was commanded by ans Poman former Sergeant in the British east
India company from the German province of Hanover who had deserted in the 1790s
lured by the lucrative rewards offered by the Indian prince for European
soldiers.
Wellsley split his army in two with the smaller force commanded by Colonel James
Stevenson to try and trap Pullman's army. After over a month of pursuit,
the two received intelligence that their quarry was at Boan.
So 30 miles to the north and planned to combine their forces there on the 24th
of September, 1803 to attack and destroy the Morath army. However,
the day before the plans meet up,
Scouts reported that the Miras had moved and were now in position directly in
front of Wellesley's army,
near the small village of our say Wellesley and command of 4,500
infantry and 5,000 cavalry found himself confronting army of 50,000.
He knew that if he waited for Stevenson to join up with him,
the army would move off.
And the pursuit of would drag on further straining the British supply lines and
possibly drawing the British forces into a disadvantageous position.
The 34 year old general had heard whispers from his colleagues that he was a
product of nepotism too young and had experienced for such an important command
in order to make his reputation. He needed victory.
So he resolved to attack the Miras right there.
And then without waiting for reinforcement,
the idea was not as insane as it might sound. The outset,
the Masa army was large, certainly,
but mostly composed of a regular infantry that Wellesley reasoned wouldn't stand
up under fire.
He had only the European trained infantry to worry about the MOAs were in a
strong defensive position behind the river Kitner covering the only known Ford
in the area. However,
Wellesley spotted twin villages on either side of the Kitna people,
guy on and war, they were small hamlets and didn't even appear on most maps.
However,
Wellesley reasons that the only way two villages would exist on either side of
the river line.
That is if there was a Ford between them Scouts soon confirms the existence of
the Ford and Wellesley decided to cross his army.
There Wellsley initially attempted to flag Pullman's army,
but the German saw what he was doing and swung his army like a Dore hinged,
rotating its 90 degrees to form a new line facing the British.
Now he was Wellesley who was in the strong position as both armies were on a
narrow MOUs between the kit and our rivers,
which favored Wellsey smaller army Wells.
The order is infantry to attack and they started off across the planes towards
the Mora position, as a say,
the Miras had more than a hundred cannons and they laid down a withering fire on
the advancing British troops,
how the British with stood the pounding and maintained their formations,
charged the cannons, capturing them and killing the Gunn.
The right flag of Pullman's line, panicked and fled. And half of the Mora,
the army fled the battlefield before being engaged. Wellsley right.
Flak on the other hand was being hard pressed and Wellsley sent in cabaret to
support them amidst the violence encounter.
It came to Wesley's attention that some of the Mora,
the gunners who had pretended to be dead were now remanding their cans.
The general himself led a cavalry charged to recapture the gun,
being on horse by a sperm and nearly killed in the me Poman had reformed his
infantry, but we Wellsley formed up to attack them. They too broken,
ran giving Wellsley the field,
the battle of say was bloody and proportion to the numbers involved.
Third of Wellesley's army was killed or wounded. And as many as 6,000 MOAs fell,
it was also strategically very important on the outcome of the war is afterwards
many of skin di and Barrar men deserted,
including many of their European officer who accepted an amnesty from the
British east India company.
If they surrendered Wellesley would win two more victories over the Miras at awe
and Garger and skin di and Barara were forced to super peace.
The campaign in India made Wellesley's career for the rest of his life.
He would mean to that.
A say was his greatest victory Napoleon on the other hand would refer to
Wellesley as the CPO general implying that his reputation was inflated by a
series of victories over minor opponents,
Wellesley would soon have a chance to prove the newly crowned French ER wrong.
And what a tease that was,
we're going to escalate the conflict between Napoleon and Wellesley, just it.
But first here is a word from today's amazing sponsor Squarespace.
Now more than ever, people are getting creative with their time.
They're reaching deep into their savings account to start a new business or
launch a blog, a website of some kind,
the world is yours with Squarespace,
the perfect tool to help you fashion a website into whatever you want it to be.
It's the platform to use when you're ready to get started on that web project
that you've been thinking about. You're looking to get in and out quick,
without thinking too much about what your website should look like. Bam,
it's one of their quick and beautiful templates to make a website that's fresh.
And for you, or maybe you are more of a hands on person,
you've got lots of opinions and ideas about exactly what your site should look
like.
Squarespace gives you all the customization options you could ever once with no
updates, no patches, no technical BS to worry about.
And once you're done setting up your website, tinkering with the design,
if you are so inclined or maybe just playing around with the colors,
there are so many extra features that Squarespace provides so that your website
can thrive. Muck campaigns, patronage, portals, social integrations, member,
only areas, analytics, commercial options, three Pacific customer support.
It's all in there in one convenient place.
So when you are ready to get started on a next web project of yours,
big or small, if it involves a website,
it's gotta be with Squarespace right now,
you can go to squarespace.com for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch,
go to west
space.com/biographics and you'll save 10% off your first purchase of a website
or a domain. And let's get back to the duke
By 1805. Wellesley was tired of India.
It spent seven years there and was ready to go home. It requested a transfer.
And when his brothers tour is governor Jim of India ended the two return to
England on board, the same ship for the next three years,
Wellesley dabbled in politics while also participating in military adventures in
Russia and Denmark raised to left tenant general in 80 0 80 was Puting commands
of an expeditionary force of 9,000 men that was supposed to attack Spanish
colonies in south America. But at the last minutes,
his force was diverted to Portugal little. Did he realize it at the time?
But events had just been set in motion that were consumed Wellesley's life for
the next seven years and turn him into a national hero in 1808 Napoleon
Bonna apart was master of Europe. The French Emper had decisively defeated,
both the Austrians and the Prussians had controlled all of Ursula, Italy,
and much of Germany and had just did a treaty with Russia.
His only real opposition left came from great Britain.
The two countries were in an awkward stale made because while Britain couldn't
hope to match Napoleon's powerful army,
neither could France Mount any effective opposition to the British Navy,
which was the undisputed master of the seas.
The cream of the French Naval fleet had been destroyed in the battle of trau in
October of 1805. And with no way to counter the British Navy,
Napoleon was unable to invade Britain,
standing his army on the wrong side of the English channel.
Napoleon tried to undermine the British by again,
attacking their commercial interests just as it attempt to do an Egypt 10 years
earlier this time Napoleon devised the continental system,
which tried to block trade between Britain and the countries of mainland Europe.
He enforced this system at bare net point threatening to invade any country that
didn't comply his threats.
They didn't impress the country of Portugal located on the Western edge of the
Iberian peninsula.
Portugal was one of great Britain's oldest and longest standing allies and the
country's economy depended heavily on foreign trade. Further.
Portugal was separated from France by the country of Spain,
which while France's all,
didn't seem likely to permit French troops to March all the way across their
country to get to Portugal. Finally,
Greg Britain promised to defend Portugal if it was attacked Napoleon. However,
in his usual spectacular fashion turns on his ally and invaded Spain posing the
government in Madrid and placing his brother Joseph on the Spanish throne.
He also occupied Portugal,
forcing the Portuguese Royal family to flee into exile and Brazil,
B Britain intervened.
And Wellsley was the first general to arrive in Portugal with a combined British
and Portuguese army.
He defeated the forces of French general Jean and doo at the battle of RAA and
the in August of 1808. However,
yearly after the two battles Wellsley found himself superseded in commands by
the governor of Gibraltar general,
Hugh Rimple Darri undermined everything Wellsley had done by signing an
agreements with general, as you know,
the convention of Citra that stipulated that the French army would be evacuated
from Portugal on board, British ships, complete with all their arms,
their cannons, and even the booty that they'd stolen from the Portuguese.
During the invasion,
the convention of Centra caused outrage in gray Britain and both Dar imple and
Wellesley were recalled to face court of inquiry over the whole affair.
Meanwhile,
Napoleon invaded the Iberian peninsula himself at the head of his grand army
decisively defeating the British at Karu in January, 1809,
killing the British commander, sir, John Moore,
the pro depo was blamed for the entire affair and would never hold a field
command again.
Wellesley who had vehemently opposed the agreement his superior had made was
cleared of all wrongdoing at a loss for what to do next,
the British secretary of war or castle Ray received a memo from Wellesley that
stated that he believed the Portugal was still an ideal place for Britain to
carry on the war against the French.
Elizabeth should be their base of operations because it could be protected by
the raw Navy castle. Ray agreed and sent Wellesley back to Portugal in April,
1809. This time in command of all British forces in theater position,
who would hold for the rest of the war.
Wellesley immediately went on the offensive Portugal had named him commander in
chief of their army, as well as the British one.
And he quickly combined them together into one integrated army,
less than a month after his arrival,
he led his new army north from Lisbon and routed martial genres,
a due SOS army at Porto liberating Portugal, second city SOS, army escaped,
but had to abandon an their artillery baggage in the process with Portugal
clears Wellesley advanced into Spain and linked up with the Spanish army
commanded by general Gregoria Questa Questa proved a rather ineffectual ally.
However, he routinely promised supplies the British and didn't provide them.
And he arrogantly believed that he knew more about military strategy than
everyone around him, including Wellesley, but at the same time,
his army was poorly to trained at one point during the campaign,
as well as the other Anglo Portuguese offices watched the entire battle line of
Spanish soldiers fired a Coffs VO at a small group of French Scouts who were out
of range causing no damage terrified by the noise of their own VO foreign entire
battalions of Spanish soldiers. Over 2000 men fled the field in a panic looting,
the British baggage train on their way out next day, the 28th of July,
1809 Wellesley faced off against the French Marshall George on at the battle oft
Avera. This was far larger in scale than any battle.
Wellesley had fought before he commanded Anar of 55,000 British Portuguese and
Spanish troops against 46,000 French Wellesley held his grounds while Jordan
Donald sent his army forward in three great columns.
A tactic Napoleon had perfected over the years as being able to smash through
enemy formations like a hammer blow,
but Wellesley who had studied Napoleons battles extensively showed off for the
first time has countered the attacking columns,
putting his troops in a defensive position on a hill,
arranging them in two deep firing lines and taking advantage of superior British
mare training,
concentrating in almost continuous VO of fire onto the approaching columns until
the French panicked and retreated. This is what happens Attel Avera.
And at the end of a bloody day of fighting that saw 15,000 combined casualties
Wellsley was in command of the field.
The victory of Tel Avera was celebrated all over and Wellsley was raised the
British pur named the VI count, Wellington oft Avera,
but Wellington as he was now known good didn't afford to rest on his laurels.
Soon after his victory, he was forced to retreat into Portugal.
The supply situation to become untenable as Wellington Spanish allies failed in
completely.
He was incensed to discover that not only had quest a refused to help him defend
Portugal against another incursion by Marshall. So,
but the Quester had also abandoned 1,500 wounded,
British soldiers left in his care and they were captured by the French 18,
10 saw Wellington under threat from a massive new French army commanded by
Marshall Andre Messina Messina was one of Napoleon's most celebrated Marshalls
and had been given orders by the Emper to sweep. The British out of Portugal.
Wellington was forced to retreat performance seen as forces though.
He was able to briefly check the marshals advance at the battle of Barco.
On the 27th of September British opinion of the army was low.
And there was speculation that the whole Portuguese adventure would have to be
called off, but Wellington wasn't beaten yet.
Messina arrived at Torres verres in October of 1810,
discover that his army had run a literal wall.
The British houses in complete secrecy constructed an elaborate line of forts
and red doubts that chain together,
the mountains across the entirety of the Libon peninsula,
the lines of Taveras had an effective communication system and interior lines
all along it to rushed defenders to any threats portion that the Portuguese had
adopted a scorched death policy before the law removing or destroying any food
fodder or shelter for miles evacuating,
a quarter of a million civilians to positions behind the lines.
Messina was completely baffled and found himself stuck in a position as winter
set in when Messina finally retreated back into Spain in March, 1811,
he had lost 21,000 men to starvation and the elements,
the lines of Tara vs marked the high to mark of the French advance while
Wellington's army emerged from behind them in the spring of 1811.
And they never used them again.
When Wellington emerged from behind the lines of Torres Vare,
he did so at the head of an army that was beginning to be honed into a powerful
weapon. The average British soldier came from a very poor backgrounds,
many had criminal records and were given a choice between joining the army or
going to prison.
Others joined because the only alternative was starving Wellington.
Like most of the upper class considered these men to be rogues prone,
to drunkenness and Buty and thus needed to be disciplined harshly. However,
Wellington also respected their ability as soldiers and praised them for
fighting well. In battle,
Wellington found himself at the head of a multinational army,
eventually consisting of British Portuguese and Spanish soldiers.
In addition to troops from the German province of Hanover who forms the King's
German Legion,
his ability to the complications of this coalition force was just as important
as his tactical skill on the battlefield equally important was his conviction
not to throw away the lives of his soldiers. Needlessly.
He excelled as defensive general able to pick his grounds and force the enemy to
attack him in 1811, after chasing the French army outta Portugal,
Wellington laid siege to the strategic border of fortres AAL mare.
The first of three strongholds he needed to capture in order to secure his
invasion route into Spain, he took our mare in May,
1811 after the French abandoned it with most of the Garrison able to avoid
capture much to Wellington's anger.
He then took the French by surprise in January 18, 12,
the advancing through a snowstorm, a SGE suit and capture the second four.
See dad Rodrigo before the French had a chance to send a relief force.
Now Wellington went south knowing he had to capture the third fortres to secure
his line of communication and supply into Spain. Unfortunately,
badass was the most difficult of the three to take it boasted,
a modern woo bristling with cannons and manned by Garrison of 5,000 French
soldiers. Wellington's army at the city under siege in March 18, 12,
and made three breaches in the walls. On the night of April, the sixth,
Wellington ordered his troops to assault batter, aha, and attack the breaches.
Since the French knew they were coming,
they had prepared all sorts of nasty surprises for the British salt troops,
including mines, ditches, sharpened steaks. And of course,
plenty of cannons and masks.
The storming of badass was a Val of fair are compounded by the small space in
which the battle was fought.
Two hours of attacks had produced nothing but carnage for the British until two
attacks with ladders on the flanks of the fortres that were only supposed to be
diversions unexpectedly succeeded in entering the city and capturing the
breaches from behind the victorious.
British ran wild through the city raping and killing Spanish civilians and
fleeing soldiers,
looting and burning homes and violence and destruction that wouldn't be fully
stopped for three days,
daybreak on April the seventh revealed why the soldiers had been so blood
thirsty,
the sight of the breaches was filled with bodies stacked on top of each other,
like firewood blood soaked the grounds and ran in the ditches like streams over
2000 British soldiers laid dead or are dying in the relatively small space part
of 4,800 total casualties sustained during the assault.
The normally composed Wellington broke down and wept when he viewed the carnage.
But despite the high cost, Wellington now had the keys to Spain in his pocket,
and he intended to use them to push the French out Spain once. And for all
After capturing battle, HTH Wellington intended to advance into Spain,
but first he needed to deal with the French army bonded by Marshall orga Moore
who had replaced Macina after months of maneuvers.
The two armies met at Salman on the 22nd of July.
Both armies were roughly the same size about 50,000,
but Wellington took advantage of a mistaken positioning by Mar mourns caught the
French by surprise inflicting a decisive defeat on them.
14,000 casualties to the allies 5,000.
It was said that Wellington had defeated an army of 40,000 in 14 minutes.
The victory forced the French out of the Spanish capital Madrid,
which was occupied by the allies.
It also convinced the Spanish who had been mistrustful of their allies to make
Wellington commander of all their armies, the general emo,
but Wellington wasn't able to capture the strategic fortres of Baras despite
laying siege to it. And when the French armies of Mar Moore,
so combined together to one force,
Wellington was compelled to retreat again towards Portugal.
By the time the campaign of 1813 began the strategic picture of the entire war
changed Napoleon's invasion of Russia. The year before it ended in disaster,
when his grand arm it was virtually destroyed,
the defeat prompted the previously defeated countries of Austria and Russia to
rise up against Napoleon. Again, joining together with Russia, Sweden,
and the allied C fighting in Spain and a new coalition against the French,
there would be no more reinforcement sent to Iberia. In fact,
the emperor started moving troops out of Spain to reinforce his increasingly
pressed armies in Germany. Wellington on the other hand,
had a reinforced and well organized army of 120,000 British Spanish and
Portuguese soldiers with it. He attacked not east as he did in 1812,
but at north towards the Spanish city of San tanera report city on the bay of
bisque only then did he advance east not to meet the French army,
but to attempt to cut it off from France, the French army retreated,
abandoning central Spain, trying to avoid being out flagged.
It was nominally headed by king Joseph Bonna apart though he left operational
control to his marshals,
but the King's presence meant that the army carried with not only equipment
needed to make war,
but also all the treasure that the French should have masked since their
invasion, perhaps as much as a hundred million in today's money.
Wellington caught up with a French shout Victoria on the 21st of June 18, 13,
and the battle that followed the French army was completely routed.
It suffered 8,000 killed wounded or captured,
and the rest fled the field in panic,
abandoning over 150 artillery pieces to the enemy.
French casualties might have been worse,
but the victorious British troop stopped pursuing the fleeing French in order to
loot the baggage train, which had also been abandoned.
Wellington continued to push.
And by the end of the year had thrown the French outta Spain entirely and had
invaded Southern France. He had just captured the city of to lose.
When word came in on the 12th of April 18, 14,
that Napoleon has positioned untenable as the combined Russian Austrian
impression armies captured Paris had abdicated and the war was over.
The news prompted the austere Wellington to break out into an impromptu flamenco
dance
As is victories mounted in Spain,
Wellington was rewarded with increasingly prestigious titles of nobility first
VI count. Then I then marque. And finally on the 3rd of May 18, 14,
he was created as the first duke of Wellington.
He was also promoted to the Army's highest rank field Marshall,
the only one in active army service.
He was also hailed as a conquering hero in Britain.
The most successful British general, since the duke of Marlborough,
some hundred years earlier,
the prime minister wanted to send him to north America to beat the United States
in the war of 18, 12, but Wellington felt he was needed more in Europe.
Instead he was named the British ambassador to the Congress,
Vienna convenes to carve up Europe in the post Napoleon world.
Everything changed on the 26th of February,
1815 when Napoleon exile to the island of El and the Mediterranean sea escaped
and returned to France,
the restored French monarchy crumbled under the onslaught of renewed sport for
Napoleon and by may had regained control of the country.
The Congress of Vienna declared nap in an out Laurens,
all the major powers of Europe resolved to once again,
put their armies in the fields to remove him from power Wellington pointed to
command British forces,
left Vienna for the Netherlands where British troops were being combined with
Dutch and small German state forces into an allied army that would fight
alongside a Prussian army commanded by general Gahar Vaughn blue shot.
They were planning to wait there until July when the Russian and Austrian armies
would join them mans.
They would all invade France together as an overwhelming force Napoleon figuring
that if he defeated both the British and the PR armies in turn,
he could force the coalition to the negotiating table marched. First,
he invaded the Netherlands on the 15th of June catching Wellington,
and luha by surprise. The first part of the Napoleons plan worked well. He put,
prevented the two armies from combining together and beat the Prussians at the
battle of Ligne on the 16th of June, forcing them to retreat,
believing the Prussians to be outta the fight.
And Napoleon now turned on Wellington who moved his army to a position he
believed he could defend Ridge line,
just south of the Belgian town of Waterloo on the 18th of June,
the two armies faced off against each other in one of the its battles ever
fought on European soil.
If you're onto a detailed play byplay of the battle of water that you should
absolutely check out our video on our sister channel geographics all about it.
The sure version is that it was gargantuan in scale involving more than 200,000
soldiers by the days ends.
And it was bloody 65,000 were dead wounded or missing.
Napoleon had two key mistakes at Waterloo that would prove to be his undoing.
First, he had underestimated Wellington,
despite being warned about him by his marshals who had fought and been beaten by
him. The emperor dismissed him as an opponent, unworthy of respect,
the CPO general, who fought sitting on his.
He believed that he could be easily swept aside seconds.
The Prussians hadn't retreated by mid afternoon.
They had appeared on the battlefield at Waterloo catching the French in the
flank, just as the British, who had not been swept aside,
but was still occupying the Ridge line that held all day defeated in attack
spearheaded by the wanted French Imperial guards.
The collapse of the guard triggered a route of the entire French army and just
like that,
it was all over Wellington and Lucia were masters of the field and Napoleon was
finished less than a week after the battle. He had to have catered again,
never to return again to power.
And after over 20 years of almost continuous conflict,
Europe was at last a peace.
Wellington was already a hero before the battle of Waterloo when his victorious
armies had marched over 6,000 miles across Spain and Portugal and defeated a
parade of French marshals and a king too. But after defeating the,
he crossed into the realm of legend at the same level as Admiral Hario Nelson,
who had decisively defeated the French Navy at 10 years earlier,
the nations of Europe lined up to throw honors at him.
He eventually acquired field martial bats from eight different countries and was
bestowed with noble rank or honors by 18 nations. Reportedly.
If he had fixed all the medals, he had earned to his uniform,
it would've been too heavy to wear to war, but Wellington,
after over 20 years of military service had grown tired of war riding among to
the slaughter of the battle of Waterloo. He wept and was hard to say.
I pray to God. I've seen my last battle true to his word.
He never saw combat again, returning to England.
Wellington discovered that not only was he one of the most influential men in
the kingdom now, but he was also one of the most admir.
It became fashionable to dress as Wellington did while on campaign.
And the man soon found himself at the center of London politics. Yes,
it seemed everyone got along well with the war hero,
except unfortunately for his wife,
Wellington had married Catherine kitty Packenham in 1806 and she had born in
two children, Arthur and Charles, however,
Wellington soon made it clear that he found her to be unpleasant company.
And the marriage was not a particularly happy one.
The two spent much of that time apart.
Wellington had been in Spain for years during the war while Kitti had remained
in London. Instead, Wellington was known to enjoy the company of other women.
A fact that was hardly a secret in London society,
even being lampooned in the press.
When one publisher wrote a letter asking the duke for money in exchange for not
publishing the lurid memoirs of one of his mistress,
Wellington supposedly were responded to the blackmail attempt by replying
publish and be damned never.
The last Wellington became an increasingly important member of the Tory party
until in 1828, it was made prime minister.
One of the last members of the house of Lords to serve in that role,
his ministry was dominated by the issue of Catholic emancipation for almost 300
years ever since king Henry thei with the Roman Catholic church and founded the
church of England Catholics and Protestants had battled for influence in power
in gray Britain.
The issue was seemingly decided in the Protestants favor when the Catholic king
James II was deposed in favor of the Protestant king William thei to keep their
hold on power. The Protestants had passed what was known as penal laws, harsh,
discriminatory Ray regulations designed to make Catholic second class citizens
within the kingdom.
While most of the more harsh measures had been repealed by the 1820s.
There were still laws on the books,
banning Catholics from serving in most public officers.
They could it be judges sheriff. So sit in parliament,
Wellington had grown up in Irelands,
which was majority Catholic and many of his best soldiers in Spain were Irish.
He had great sympathy for their plight and as a result,
he pushed hard for the repeal of these laws,
which was accompanied with the passing of the Catholic relief act of 1829,
despite vigorous opposition from within his own party. However,
Wellington's government was brought down in 1830 when a wave of civil unrest
prompted by the unfair rules government's election to the house of commons that
were heavily tilted in favor of the rich and powerful swept the country.
Parliament voted on a vote of no confidence in Wellington's ministry.
And Wellington resigned in November.
Wellington remains an important political figure as the Tory party transformed
into the conservative party led by sir Rob peel.
He would serve as a cabinet minister in Peel's government and as the
conservative leader of the house of Lords until his retirement in 1846,
he also served as an advisor to the young queen Victoria.
The duke of Wellington died on the 14th of September,
1852 in Kent at the 80 of 83 from a stroke.
His body was transported by train to London,
where he was honored with the state funeral,
the firsts in Admiral Nelson in 1805. He was buried in St.
Paul's cathedral next to Nelson,
who had met once a few weeks before the Admiral's death and had a long
conversation with him. The legacy of the duke of Wellington is enormous.
His name,
adorns everything from the Capitol city of new Zealand's to a popular style of
boots.
His military tactics inspired a generation of military scholars and generals,
and can be seen most clearly in the campaigns of Robert E.
Lee during the American civil war. Most importantly,
his victory over Napole usher in an unprecedented period of peace and prosperity
on the European Conson.
That lasted until the outbreak of the first world war a century later with less
focus on mill at campaigns and destruction,
the European nations instead focused on industrial outputs.
And later on social wealth app,
it was an incredibly transformative period that likely would not have been
possible without the work of one man who rose from acuity to become perhaps the
greatest soldier that United Kingdom has ever seen.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thought bottom below. Don't forget to subscribe.
Please do check it off. Fantastic sponsor Squarespace link to below.
Thank you for watching.